doc/source/pre/whatsnew/1.4.rst, before:

What's new in Kwant 1.4
=======================

This article explains the user-visible changes in Kwant 1.4.0.
See also the `full list of changes up to the most recent bugfix
release of the 1.4 series
<https://gitlab.kwant-project.org/kwant/kwant/compare/v1.4.0...latest-1.4>`_.

Value functions may no longer have default values for parameters
----------------------------------------------------------------
Using value functions with default values for parameters can be
problematic, especially when re-using value functions between simulations.
When parameters have default values it is easy to forget that such a
parameter exists at all, because it is not necessary to provide them explicitly
to functions that use the Kwant system. This means that other value functions
might be introduced that also depend on the same parameter,
but in an inconsistent way (e.g. a parameter 'phi' that is a superconducting
phase in one value function, but a peierls phase in another). This leads
to bugs that are confusing and hard to track down.

Concretely, the above means that the following no longer works::

  syst = kwant.Builder()

  # Parameter 't' has a default value of 1
  def onsite(site, V, t=1):
    return V = 2 * t

  def hopping(site_a, site_b, t=1):
    return -t

  syst[...] = onsite
  syst[...] = hopping

  # Raises ValueError
  syst = syst.finalized()

As a solution, simply remove the default values and always provide ``t``.
To deal with many parameters, the following idiom may be useful::

  defaults = dict(a=0, b=1, c=2, d=3)
  ...
  smatrix = kwant.smatrix(syst, E, params=dict(defaults, d=4, e=5))

Note that it allows to override defaults as well as to add additional
parameters.

System parameter substitution
-----------------------------
After the introduction of ``Builder.fill`` it has become possible to construct
Kwant systems by first creating a "model" system with high symmetry and then
filling a lower symmetry system with this model. Often, however, one wants
to use different parameter values in different parts of a system. In
previous versions of Kwant this was difficult to achieve.

Builders now have a method ``substituted`` that makes it easy to substitute
different names for parameters. For example if a builder ``model``
has a parameter ``V``, and one wishes to have different values for ``V`` in
the scattering region and leads, one could do the following::

   syst = kwant.Builder()
   syst.fill(model.substituted(V='V_dot', ...))

   lead = kwant.Builder()
   lead.fill(model.substituted(V='V_lead'), ...)

   syst.attach_lead(lead)
   fsyst = syst.finalized()

   kwant.smatrix(syst, params=dict(V_dot=0, V_lead=1))

Interpolated density plots
--------------------------
A new function `~kwant.plotter.density` has been added that can be used to
visualize a density defined over the sites of a Kwant system. This convolves
the "discrete" density (defined over the system sites) with a "bump" function
in realspace. The output of `~kwant.plotter.density` can be more informative
that `~kwant.plotter.map` when plotting systems with many sites, where it is
not important to see the individual contribution from each site.

Configurable maximum velocity in stream plots
---------------------------------------------
The function `~kwant.plotter.streamplot` has got a new option ``vmax``.  Note
that this option is not available in `~kwant.plotter.current`.  In order to use
it, one has to call ``streamplot`` directly as shown in the docstring of
``current``.

kwant.continuum.discretize can be used with rectangular lattices
----------------------------------------------------------------
Previously the discretizer could only be used with lattices with the same
lattice constant in all directions. Now it is possible to pass rectangular
lattices to the discretizer::

  kwant.continuum.discretize(
    'k_x**2 + k_y**2',
    grid=kwant.lattice.general([(1, 0), (0, 2]),
  )

This is useful when you need a finer discretization step in some spatial
directions, and a coarser one in others.

Improved heuristic for colorscale limits in `kwant.plotter.map`
---------------------------------------------------------------
Previously `~kwant.plotter.map` would set the limits for the color scale
to the extrema of the data being plotted when ``vmin`` and ``vmax`` were
not provided. This is the behaviour of ``matplotlib.imshow``. When the data
to be plotted has very sharp and high peaks this would mean that most of the
data would appear near the bottom of the color scale, and all of the features
would be washed out by the presence of the peak. Now `~kwant.plotter.map`
employs a heuristic for setting the colorscale when there are outliers,
and will emit a warning when this is detected.

Commit message:

add a whatsnew entry for 'magnetic_gauge'

doc/source/pre/whatsnew/1.4.rst, after:

What's new in Kwant 1.4
=======================

This article explains the user-visible changes in Kwant 1.4.0.
See also the `full list of changes up to the most recent bugfix
release of the 1.4 series
<https://gitlab.kwant-project.org/kwant/kwant/compare/v1.4.0...latest-1.4>`_.

Automatic Peierls phase calculation
-----------------------------------
When defining systems with orbital magnetic fields it is often cumbersome to
manually calculate the phases required by the Peierls substitution, and to
ensure that the chosen gauge is consistent across the whole system
(this is especially true for systems with leads that point in different
directions). This release introduces `kwant.physics.magnetic_gauge`,
which calculates the Peierls phases for you::

  import numpy as np
  import kwant

  def hopping(a, b, t, phi):
    return -t * np.exp(-1j * phi(a, b))

  syst = make_system(hopping).finalized()
  gauge = kwant.physics.magnetic_gauge(syst)

  def B(pos):
    return np.exp(-np.sum(pos * pos))

  kwant.hamiltonian_submatrix(syst, params=dict(t=1, phi=gauge(B))

Note that the API for this functionality is provisional, and may be
revised in a future version of Kwant.

Value functions may no longer have default values for parameters
----------------------------------------------------------------
Using value functions with default values for parameters can be
problematic, especially when re-using value functions between simulations.
When parameters have default values it is easy to forget that such a
parameter exists at all, because it is not necessary to provide them explicitly
to functions that use the Kwant system. This means that other value functions
might be introduced that also depend on the same parameter,
but in an inconsistent way (e.g. a parameter 'phi' that is a superconducting
phase in one value function, but a peierls phase in another). This leads
to bugs that are confusing and hard to track down.

Concretely, the above means that the following no longer works::

  syst = kwant.Builder()

  # Parameter 't' has a default value of 1
  def onsite(site, V, t=1):
    return V = 2 * t

  def hopping(site_a, site_b, t=1):
    return -t

  syst[...] = onsite
  syst[...] = hopping

  # Raises ValueError
  syst = syst.finalized()

As a solution, simply remove the default values and always provide ``t``.
To deal with many parameters, the following idiom may be useful::

  defaults = dict(a=0, b=1, c=2, d=3)
  ...
  smatrix = kwant.smatrix(syst, E, params=dict(defaults, d=4, e=5))

Note that it allows to override defaults as well as to add additional
parameters.

System parameter substitution
-----------------------------
After the introduction of ``Builder.fill`` it has become possible to construct
Kwant systems by first creating a "model" system with high symmetry and then
filling a lower symmetry system with this model. Often, however, one wants
to use different parameter values in different parts of a system. In
previous versions of Kwant this was difficult to achieve.

Builders now have a method ``substituted`` that makes it easy to substitute
different names for parameters. For example if a builder ``model``
has a parameter ``V``, and one wishes to have different values for ``V`` in
the scattering region and leads, one could do the following::

   syst = kwant.Builder()
   syst.fill(model.substituted(V='V_dot', ...))

   lead = kwant.Builder()
   lead.fill(model.substituted(V='V_lead'), ...)

   syst.attach_lead(lead)
   fsyst = syst.finalized()

   kwant.smatrix(syst, params=dict(V_dot=0, V_lead=1))

Interpolated density plots
--------------------------
A new function `~kwant.plotter.density` has been added that can be used to
visualize a density defined over the sites of a Kwant system. This convolves
the "discrete" density (defined over the system sites) with a "bump" function
in realspace. The output of `~kwant.plotter.density` can be more informative
that `~kwant.plotter.map` when plotting systems with many sites, where it is
not important to see the individual contribution from each site.

Configurable maximum velocity in stream plots
---------------------------------------------
The function `~kwant.plotter.streamplot` has got a new option ``vmax``.  Note
that this option is not available in `~kwant.plotter.current`.  In order to use
it, one has to call ``streamplot`` directly as shown in the docstring of
``current``.

kwant.continuum.discretize can be used with rectangular lattices
----------------------------------------------------------------
Previously the discretizer could only be used with lattices with the same
lattice constant in all directions. Now it is possible to pass rectangular
lattices to the discretizer::

  kwant.continuum.discretize(
    'k_x**2 + k_y**2',
    grid=kwant.lattice.general([(1, 0), (0, 2]),
  )

This is useful when you need a finer discretization step in some spatial
directions, and a coarser one in others.

Improved heuristic for colorscale limits in `kwant.plotter.map`
---------------------------------------------------------------
Previously `~kwant.plotter.map` would set the limits for the color scale
to the extrema of the data being plotted when ``vmin`` and ``vmax`` were
not provided. This is the behaviour of ``matplotlib.imshow``. When the data
to be plotted has very sharp and high peaks this would mean that most of the
data would appear near the bottom of the color scale, and all of the features
would be washed out by the presence of the peak. Now `~kwant.plotter.map`
employs a heuristic for setting the colorscale when there are outliers,
and will emit a warning when this is detected.
